=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.41.8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.41.7 release and the 5.41.8
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.41.6, first read
L<perl5417delta>, which describes differences between 5.41.6 and 5.41.7.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

=head2 Removed containing function references for functions without eval

Perl 5.40 reintroduced unconditional references from functions to their
containing functions to fix a bug introduced in Perl 5.18 that broke the
special behaviour of C<eval EXPR> in package C<DB> which is used by the
debugger.

In some cases this change led to circular reference chains between closures and
other existing references, resulting in memory leaks.

This change has been reverted, fixing
[L<GH #22547|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/22547>] but re-breaking
[L<GH #19370|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19370>].

This means the reference loops won't occur, and that lexical variables and
functions from enclosing functions may not be visible in the debugger.

Note that calling C<eval EXPR> in a function unconditionally causes a function
to reference its enclosing functions as it always has.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

The peephole optimizer recognises the following zero-offset C<substr> patterns
and swaps in a new dedicated operator (C<OP_SUBSTR_LEFT>).
[L<GH #22785|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/22785>]

    substr($x, 0, ...)
    substr($x, 0, ..., '')

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.81 to 1.82.

=item *

L<Config::Perl::V> has been upgraded from version 0.36 to 0.38.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.190 to 2.191.

=item *

L<DBM_Filter> has been upgraded from version 0.06 to 0.07.

=item *

L<experimental> has been upgraded from version 0.032 to 0.034.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> has been upgraded from version 3.56 to 3.57.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Typemaps> has been upgraded from version 3.56 to 3.57.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20241220 to 5.20250120.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.67 to 1.68.

=item *

L<Term::Table> has been upgraded from version 0.023 to 0.024.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302204 to 1.302207.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.3401_01 to 1.35.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes listed in
this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

L<perlfunc/shmread> and L<perlfunc/shmwrite> are no longer limited to 31-bit
values for their POS and SIZE arguments.
[L<GH #22895|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/22895>]

=item *

L<perlfunc/shmread> is now better behaved if VAR is not a plain string.  If VAR
is a tied variable, it calls C<STORE> once; previously, it would also call
C<FETCH>, but without using the result.  If VAR is a reference, the referenced
entity has its refcount properly decremented when VAR is turned into a string;
previously, it would leak memory.
[L<GH #22898|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/22898>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.41.8 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.41.7
and contains approximately 8,800 lines of changes across 370 files from 17
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 6,800 lines of changes to 320 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.41.8:

Branislav Zahradník, Chad Granum, Dan Book, David Mitchell, Graham Knop,
H.Merijn Brand, James E Keenan, Karl Williamson, Lukas Mai, Max Maischein, Paul
Evans, Philippe Bruhat (BooK), Richard Leach, Sergei Zhmylev, Steve Hay, TAKAI
Kousuke, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>. There may also be information at
L<https://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to
report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5, you
can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
